[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In terms of the changes
that one goes through,
one must recognize that
even though you see where
you're going, it is important
that you honor where
you've been.
And that involves grieving.
It involves acknowledging
and giving space to.
Because when you move from
like the whole initiation
rites of going from
childhood to adulthood,
there is a process in the
initiation of leaving childhood
behind.
And so for us, as we go
in spiritual journey,
there is a loss of the dreams
we were functioning under,
of the models we are
functioning under.
And you have to slow down
enough to bury the dead,
to sort of allow the thing
to have its completion
in the process of going on.
You don't want to
get obsessed with it,
but you don't want
to push it away.
And often, in our
culture particularly,
I see people
unwilling to grieve,
unwilling to honor
where they've been,
unwilling to honor the losses.
Because if you've built a whole
world on a myth of happiness
coming from a certain thing
and then you get there
and you realize that
you've been had,
that it isn't what
it's about, think
of the investment, of the depth
you've invested in that myth.
And you can't just say, well,
that's over now, I'll go on.
You have really got
to grieve for it
and allow it to
have its completion.
And I think we're in
between and learning
how to grieve for the
dream of our innocence
through all of the stuff that
went on in our childhood.
Grieve and then go on.
And grieve and then go on.
And I invite you to
play with that balance.
Don't get caught.
Don't push away.
And this for me is the
truth of the relationship
between personality and
spiritual dimension,
spiritual perception.
That I feel it is this
kind of intimate dance
that my personality,
my karma as manifest
through my personality, guides
me into spiritual practices.
The spiritual practices lead me
to reperceive my personality.
The reperceiving leads me to
come back and do more work
on my personality from a
different point of view.
The different point
of view leads me
to a new spiritual practices
or doing the practices
from a different place.
As I come into these
practices, there's more space.
In the presence of space,
certain personality stuff
arises that I never
noticed before.
And it's like skimming soup.
And then I go back
and I skim some more.
in my practice.
And there is no dishonor
as a spiritual person
in working with
personality stuff,
working with neurotic
relationships, and all that.
The only thing is it is like
the garden of infinite delights.
It's incredibly seductive.
And you must balance
it all the time
with very deep
spiritual practices
in order to not get sucked in.
But you've got to be very aware,
because many of us in the West
have fallen for it of getting
into very high spiritual states
by pushing away our
personality stuff.
And it's still uncooked.
We haven't dealt with it.
So watch that balance.
I don't think any of us
are masters at this game
yet, that I know of.
So it's grieving, letting
go, grieving, letting go,
letting the models die.
And I think part
of that is becoming
comfortable with
the idea of death
and your non-existence in the
form you've been attached to.
Grieving your own death is an
interesting way of saying it.
Rilke's line is so beautiful.
That one can contain
death, the whole of death,
can hold it in
one's heart gentle,
and not refuse to go on
living is inexpressible.
Is inexpressible.
To live this moment not denying
the fragility of the forms,
it's like looking at suffering.
To keep your eyes open
and looking at what is.
To look at the violence, the
cruelty, the greed, the fear,
the agitation, the lust,
the doubt, all of it,
the sloth and torpor, all of it.
To look at it all,
look at it all,
and have the perspective
of the balance of saying,
I am looking directly into the
light of the mystery and to not
flicker and turn away
the mystery of death,
to sit with it and from
out of that to act.
And the statement "It's too
much for me," I can't stand it.
Look again.
Look again at who the
"me" is and whether you
want to hold on to that "me."
Saints in India are often called
"the living dead," because they
bear the unbearable.
It is unbearable.
And so instead of pushing away
to make it bearable for who you
think you are, you
surrender who you
think you are into the ocean.
And then it is bearable
because you aren't.
It just all is.
And out of all of it
comes a compassion
that is breathtaking.
It's the genuine compassion
of your deepest truth.
And it rises up.
And your acts towards
other human being
aren't because you're
good, or you're kind,
or you even want to help them.
That's all interesting,
but that's not what it is.
It's the compassion of
the universe rising up
in relation to the suffering.
It's this dance.
It's this incredible
tension and play of form.
All I can say is,
wow, it's incredible.
It is incredible.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]